SUBJECT: Letter of Support for Phase II of POLARIS addressing STTR Topic “SF24B-T011: Into the Wild-Transitioning Basic Rsh Algs to Ops”.
1. The Space Domain Awareness (SDA) TAP Lab accelerates delivery of space battle management software to defense centers. We decompose adversary space kill chains into problem statements and invite industry, academia, and government to address them in 3-month cycles. We are charged to field a prototype battle management system before the end of 2025.
2. I am fully supportive of Interactive Aptitude LLC’s POLARIS (Platform for Operational Lifecycle, Algorithmic Research, and Integration in SDA-Operations) Phase II. Advanced simulation-based algorithm validation and transition capabilities are the highest priority for the SDA TAP Lab. Funding awards would help transition this capability into interim operations with the Joint Commercial Operations (JCO) cell or integrate into workflows at the National Space Defense Center (NSDC) to enable reconfigurable space architectures that provide adaptability and resiliency to the space mission.
3. POLARIS provides a critical enhancement to fill space-domain-awareness capability gaps. Specifically, by delivering a validated, high-fidelity simulation environment that fuses real-world sensor data with physics-based modeling and standardized scoring to rigorously evaluate candidate SDA algorithms against USSF transition criteria. Additionally, its modular micro-service adapters and publish/subscribe data interfaces within the SDA TAP Lab will enhance rapid integration, repeatable testing, and seamless interoperability with existing NSDC and JCO workflows.
4. Please don’t hesitate to contact me joshua.murphy.19@spaceforce.mil.