The difficulties of target state recognition in cognitive electronic warfare are reflected in the following three aspects:

(1) Target signal threat perception in cognitive electronic warfare faces a "small sample space." Conventional artificial intelligence algorithms mostly require sufficient training samples to ensure algorithm performance. However, due to tactical usage and technical conditions, cognitive electronic warfare systems can only intercept a small amount of sample information of the target in a short period of time. In particular, for unknown threat radiation sources, their signal samples can only be obtained through online reconnaissance during the confrontation process.

(2) Target signal threat perception in cognitive electronic countermeasures is an “incremental” identification method [12-14] On the one hand, in cognitive electronic warfare, the warfare system continuously emits jamming signals to interact with the external environment, while also continuously receiving signals transmitted by the target, forming an "incremental" signal "data stream." On the other hand, without any interaction, some operating modes or anti-jamming measures of the warfare target may be "hidden." This requires the warfare system to be able to adapt to and identify new states of the target, even new targets that have never been seen before.

(3) Target signal threat perception in cognitive electronic countermeasures presents multiple "uncertainties." Due to the complexity of the electromagnetic environment and the inevitable measurement errors of reconnaissance systems, it is sometimes impossible to obtain the precise values of the radiation source signal parameters or even the complete signal parameter vector. In other words, electromagnetic signal samples may exhibit uncertainty characteristic parameters such as interval or incomplete parameters. Therefore, it is necessary to study models or algorithms that can adapt to this uncertainty information.
------------------
Abstract
Development and applications of technologies of cognitive radio, software-defined network, cognitive network as well as anti-jamming and low intercept probability in radar and other communication systems have led to an exponential increase in the complexity of the electromagnetic environment. When faced with the challenges in the future complicated battlefield environment, how to speed up the loop of “observe-orient-decide-act (OODA)” and realize electromagnetic agility is the key problem for electronic warfare system. To make the system more cognitive, we combine the theory of artificial intelligence with electronic warfare, which can significantly enhance the ability to sense a threat signal, make a jamming decision, and evaluate the jamming effect. Moreover, this will shorten the reaction time to unknown threats, speed up the OODA loop, and strengthen the operational capability of the system.


1 Conceptual connotation and research status
1.1 Electronic warfare concepts and challenges
1.1.1 Concept of Electronic Warfare
Electronic warfare (EW), also known as electronic countermeasures (ECM), is defined as "the use of electromagnetic energy, directed energy, acoustic energy and other technical means to control the electromagnetic spectrum, weaken and destroy the enemy's electronic information equipment, systems, networks and related weapons systems or personnel combat effectiveness, while protecting the normal combat effectiveness of one's own electronic information equipment, systems, networks and related weapons systems or personnel."[1,2]”.

As a combat action, electronic warfare has the following characteristics: (1) Electronic warfare is a dynamic game between the enemy and us. Electronic warfare includes two contradictory aspects: electronic confrontation and electronic counter-confrontation. The game struggle between the two opposing sides in electronic warfare is a dynamic process of mutual identification and mutual avoidance. The key to victory lies in whether one can better grasp the characteristics of the other side and implement correct tactics on this basis. (2) The core resource that the two sides of electronic warfare fight for is the electromagnetic spectrum. All electronic warfare actions are carried out in a complex electromagnetic signal environment. Whoever can occupy and use a wider electromagnetic space can seize the initiative in electronic warfare. (3) Electronic warfare operations have a wide range and diverse means of operation. Electronic warfare has many technical branches such as radar confrontation, communication confrontation, optoelectronic confrontation, etc. These means include everything that can be used to fight for electromagnetic space, from passive release of decoys for protection to electronic anti-radiation firepower strikes.

1.1.2 Challenges Facing Traditional Electronic Warfare Systems
With the continuous development of information technology, the battlefield electromagnetic environment is becoming increasingly complex. The widespread application of intelligent technology, network technology, and anti-interference technology in new radar and communication equipment has brought new challenges to traditional electronic warfare systems.

(1) The difficulty of detecting threats to target signals in a complex electromagnetic environment increases. In modern battlefield environments, the use of various electronic devices such as radar detection, photoelectric detection, electronic reconnaissance, and electronic jamming has greatly increased the complexity of the battlefield electromagnetic environment. An electronic warfare device may be simultaneously exposed to electromagnetic radiation from dozens or even hundreds of electronic devices. It is a huge challenge for electronic warfare systems to quickly intercept, sort, and identify threat targets from these massive signals and to carry out effective electronic attacks on them.

(2) The autonomous perception and rapid response capabilities of intelligent electronic information equipment have been greatly enhanced. Driven by technologies such as artificial intelligence, software radio, and cognitive radio, a new generation of adaptive electronic information equipment with cognitive capabilities fully utilizes its ability to perceive the environment, forming a closed loop between transmission and reception, allowing it to adjust the working mode, transmission parameters, processing process, etc. in real time according to the environment (including clutter, geographical environment, interference, etc.), greatly improving the performance of all aspects of the system, thereby gradually widening the technological gap in electronic warfare equipment. For advanced target systems with cognitive capabilities, there is a serious imbalance between the intelligence level of traditional electronic countermeasure equipment and the countermeasure target, and the countermeasure effect will be greatly weakened or even completely ineffective. Therefore, how to effectively counter intelligent adaptive electronic information systems is an urgent problem to be solved in the field of electronic countermeasures.

(3) It is extremely difficult to counter networked information systems. The trend of networking of battlefield information systems such as radar and communications has put forward a more urgent demand for the development of new electronic countermeasures equipment. For example, traditional radar jamming methods can only suppress one or part of the radar in the radar network, while the entire radar network can eliminate the impact of interference through information fusion of multiple radar sensors; traditional communication jamming methods can only interfere with and suppress part of the links in the communication network, and the nodes in the network can still communicate normally by relying on link detours. Faced with networked information systems, it is urgent for the opponent to develop intelligent countermeasures to identify the behavior of the networked system so that targeted countermeasures can be taken to timely discover and attack the key nodes and key subsystems of the target network system.

1.2 The Concept of Cognitive Electronic Warfare and the Main Problems It Addresses
The struggle between opposing sides in electronic warfare is a dynamic process of mutual recognition and avoidance. Only when electronic warfare equipment possesses the ability to "learn while engaging," identifying the opponent's feedback and adjusting its response strategy in a timely manner, can it seize the initiative in future electronic warfare. To this end, the concept of cognitive electronic warfare systems with learning capabilities has been proposed both domestically and internationally.

A cognitive electronic warfare system is an intelligent, dynamic, closed-loop system that uses prior knowledge and autonomous interactive learning to perceive and change the surrounding local electromagnetic environment. Based on real-time perception of the electromagnetic environment, it can efficiently and autonomously adjust jammers and receivers to adapt to changes in the electromagnetic environment, improving the rapid response and reliability of jamming.[3].

Cognitive electronic warfare can be further defined as electronic warfare operations based on cognitive electronic warfare equipment, focusing on autonomous and interactive electromagnetic environment learning capabilities and dynamic, intelligent countermeasure task processing. This represents the upgrade of electronic warfare from "manual cognition" to "automatic cognition" by machines. The improvement in equipment cognitive capabilities embodies the fundamental nature of cognitive electronic warfare and serves as a significant characteristic that distinguishes it from traditional electronic warfare.

The basic characteristics of cognitive electronic warfare include perceiving the environment, adapting to new threats, waveform changes, and learning capabilities. Its cognitive process is a kind of perceiving the environment (observe)
→
Orient
→
Make a decision
→
The OODA loop of action. Learning ability plays a role in every step of the loop and is the most important capability requirement for cognitive electronic warfare.

1.3 Current status of foreign research
The United States was the first to recognize the opportunities that cognitive technology brings to the development of electronic warfare. Since 2010, the US military has been conducting research on cognitive electronic warfare technology, focusing on improving the cognitive capabilities of its equipment. These research projects include adaptive electronic warfare behavior learning, adaptive radar countermeasures, cognitive jammers, and the cognitive electronic warfare program.

1.3.1 Adaptive Electronic Warfare Behavioral Learning Project
In 2010, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) of the United States announced the "Behavioral Learning for Adaptive Electronic Warfare (BLADE)" project.[4] The project aims to detect, characterize, classify, and generate countermeasures for known and unknown wireless communication systems. The project will develop a networked electronic attack system capable of detecting and analyzing wireless communication threats in real time and automatically jamming emerging wireless communication threats on the battlefield.[5]
The structure of the case-based learning and reasoning engine used in the BLADE project is presented. This architecture feeds back interference assessment information for new targets to the reasoning engine, informing it whether the selected interference measures are effective. This allows the case library to be continuously expanded and updated in real-world environments, improving the system's adaptability.

Furthermore, this paper presents a cognitive system architecture for communication confrontation, as shown in Figure1As shown in the figure, after the reconnaissance receiver receives the communication signal, it undergoes a series of preprocessing and is then fed into the feature extraction module. This module uses a number of feature transformation and signal processing methods to determine the individual threat characteristics of the communication target. Next, communication terminal identification (including battlefield communication countermeasure terminals and satellite communication countermeasure terminals) is performed to determine the signal category and individual characteristics. Furthermore, dynamic target analysis and behavioral intention inference are performed on the communication network to generate a network model. The inference results are fed into the jamming effect evaluation and jamming strategy generation modules, respectively, to ultimately configure and generate a jamming strategy.
 
Figure 1 (Color online) Cognitive architecture for communication countermeasure


1.3.2 Adaptive Radar Countermeasures
In 2012, DARPA launched the Adaptive Radar Countermeasures (ARC) research project.[6], seeks to develop airborne electronic warfare capabilities capable of countering enemy adaptive radar systems. The project requires the ability to counter adaptive radar threats based on observable signals within tactically relevant timeframes. Adaptive radar threats are enemy radars with novel, unknown, or uncertain waveforms and behaviors, particularly multi-function surface-to-air and air-to-air phased array radars. These radars perform multiple functions, including surveillance, acquisition, tracking, non-cooperative target recognition, and missile tracking, and exhibit highly agile characteristics in beam control, waveforms, and coherent processing cycles.[5]
A cognitive electronic warfare architecture for countering new radar waveforms is proposed: the first step is signal classification and feature description; the second step is countermeasure synthesis. A clustering module generates pulse description words (PDWs) from radar signals and feeds these into a feature extractor. Next, the extracted features are fed into a case-based reasoning module and a Bayesian network module, which respectively output the countermeasure category and emitter type, operating mode, and behavioral intent. Finally, a fuzzy reasoning module completes countermeasure synthesis.

Furthermore, this paper presents a cognitive system architecture for radar countermeasures. As shown in the figure 2, after the reconnaissance receiver receives the radar signal, it undergoes a series of preprocessing and is then fed into the feature extraction module. Through several feature transformation and signal processing methods, the radar signal's spectral characteristics (one-dimensional or two-dimensional) and fingerprint features are obtained. The signal modulation type is then identified, and the PDW features are further obtained. The clustering and sorting module uses an unsupervised clustering algorithm to sort and identify multiple overlapping PDWs, deriving the radiation source categories and further classifying and identifying the radiation source's operating status. The identification results are fed into the behavioral intention inference and jamming strategy generation modules, respectively. Finally, the jamming strategy is configured based on the behavioral intention inference results.
 Figure 2 (Color online) Cognitive architecture for radar countermeasure

1.3.3 US Air Force Cognitive Jammer Project
In January 2010, the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory announced the "Cognitive Jammer" project.[7] The project aims to develop a versatile and flexible first-generation cognitive jammer architecture to counter software-defined radio (SDR) or cognitive radio (CDR) stations that utilize dynamic spectrum access. The goal of the cognitive jammer is to increase spectrum superiority by improving jamming effectiveness while minimizing self-jamming, ultimately reducing the time required to "sense, learn, adapt, and act" from days to months to seconds to minutes. The cognitive jammer project emphasizes learning efficiency and dynamic adjustment strategies, resulting in a highly effective electronic countermeasure technology capable of learning from its environment and making dynamic intelligent adjustments.

1.3.4 US Navy Cognitive Electronic Warfare Program
The US Navy launched the "Cognitive Electronic Warfare Research" program in 2013.[8] Key tasks include developing adaptive cognitive electronic warfare technologies, high-throughput and rapidly programmable electronic warfare system technologies, adaptive electronic warfare simulation environments, and innovative electronic warfare concepts. Adaptive cognitive electronic warfare will involve applying adaptive machine learning algorithms to replace traditional static emitter databases and pre-programmed countermeasures to counter electronic warfare systems with flexible waveform bandwidths, diverse functionality, and electronic protection modes. Key research areas include spectrum knowledge perception and accumulation, spectrum learning, spectrum reasoning, and spectrum attacks.

2 Cognitive Electronic Warfare Architecture
In order to improve the flexibility, versatility and electromagnetic environment adaptability of cognitive electronic warfare systems, the literature[9-11]Inspired by this, this paper designs the cognitive electronic warfare system architecture to consist of five parts: software-defined reconfigurable reconnaissance and jamming equipment, equipment control middle layer, cognitive electronic warfare application, cognitive engine middle layer and cognitive engine, as shown in the figure.3shown.

Software-defined, reconfigurable reconnaissance and jamming equipment is the hardware foundation for cognitive EW systems to adapt to electromagnetic environments and counter unknown threats. It allows for online software definition and reconfiguration of the functions and parameters of the reconnaissance and jamming equipment based on the learning and reasoning results of the cognitive engine. The device control middle layer serves as the software control interface for the reconnaissance and jamming equipment, enabling cognitive EW applications to be independent of the hardware platform type and specific implementation details. Cognitive EW applications can be flexibly deployed based on different application platforms (airborne, shipborne, or vehicle-mounted), different countermeasure targets (radar, communications, or optoelectronics), and different application scenarios (electronic countermeasure reconnaissance, electronic countermeasure support jamming, electronic countermeasure accompanying jamming, or electronic countermeasure distributed jamming). The cognitive engine middle layer serves as the control interface for the cognitive engine, enabling loose coupling between cognitive EW applications and the cognitive engine, enhancing system flexibility. The cognitive engine is the core of the cognitive EW system and the primary difference between cognitive EW systems and traditional EW systems. The cognitive engine consists of three tightly coupled components: an inference engine, a learning engine, and a knowledge base. The inference engine can employ case-based reasoning, Bayesian network-based reasoning, and fuzzy reasoning. Threats are identified and inferred based on data sensed by reconnaissance equipment. The learning machine makes preliminary decisions and supports actions based on the inference engine's output and the prior knowledge pre-loaded in the knowledge base. Based on the feedback from the actions, it uses methods such as transfer learning and reinforcement learning to generate new knowledge and continuously expand the knowledge base.

The typical working process of a cognitive electronic warfare system when applied to jamming is as follows: first, it detects and sorts target signals from the threat environment. Then, through parameter measurement and state identification of the jamming target, it grasps the feedback of the current jamming signal and the transition between different states of the jamming target, evaluates the jamming effectiveness, and after optimizing the jamming strategy, guides the subsequent jamming resource scheduling, making the jamming more proactive and targeted. The corresponding cognitive electronic warfare operational flow chart is shown in Figure 1.4.

Compared with traditional electronic warfare, the newly added cognitive confrontation loop in the flowchart is the core of the system's cognitive confrontation capability.

 
Figure 3 (Color online) General architecture of cognitive electronic warfare system

  
Figure 4 (Color online) Operational flowchart of cognitive electronic warfare

3 Key technologies
3.1 Intelligent Perception of Electromagnetic Behavior and Autonomous Threat Identification
3.1.1 Technical Content
Intelligent electromagnetic behavior perception and autonomous threat identification refers to the process by which a countermeasure system detects and processes target signals, identifies the target's state and behavioral characteristics, and ultimately estimates the target's threat level and determines its threat level. The target state is a comprehensive representation of a series of parameters describing the characteristics of the target's radiation source, such as beam pointing, operating mode, and transmitted signal parameters. Different parameters characterize different states of the radiation source, and regular changes in the target state are the target's behavioral characteristics. Target behavior refers to the changes in the target state caused by the external electromagnetic environment (including interference and clutter) or internal system requirements during the operation of the target radiation source. These changes are regular, not random.

3.1.2 Problems to be solved
(1) Multi-level feature extraction of target signals. In order to identify the target state and behavior, the sorted target emission signal needs to be represented as a feature vector. Therefore, it is necessary to first define the target signal characteristic parameters from the perspective of the adversary, and then study multi-dimensional and multi-level feature extraction techniques to form a modeling representation of the target state and behavior on this basis.

(2) Target state recognition. This is the core content of target signal threat perception. Research on target state recognition requires in-depth analysis of the various dimensional characteristics of the target system, and the construction of a multi-level threat recognition system and specific recognition methods in a bottom-up manner to solve the problem of accurate recognition and adaptive perception of new or unknown target states in complex environments. Based on the results of target state recognition, the adversarial system can further analyze the changing laws of the target state during the adversarial process, thereby analyzing the target's behavioral characteristics.
(3) Target state threat level analysis. Based on the results of the target state and behavior characteristic analysis, a threat assessment index system is established from the perspective of the adversary to evaluate the threat level of each target state and form a threat level for each target state. This is the final result of signal threat perception.

3.1.3 Basic methods and difficulties
Target signal detection and sorting are similar to traditional electronic countermeasure systems and are relatively mature technologies. However, with the increasing complexity of electronic countermeasure environments, the presence of multiple active and passive signals, including enemy transmissions, friendly signals, clutter, and noise, poses a certain challenge to target signal detection and sorting.

Target signal feature extraction can first define target signal characteristic parameters from the adversary's perspective based on an expert knowledge base. Then, algorithms related to feature dimensionality reduction in machine learning theory are studied. This allows for multi-level feature extraction of target signals detected by the adversarial system, selecting the most effective features for state recognition, and improving the accuracy and efficiency of subsequent recognition of target state and behavioral characteristics.

The essence of target state recognition is a pattern classification problem, which can be solved by classification algorithms in machine learning theory, mainly including three types of methods: supervised learning, semi-supervised learning, and unsupervised learning.

The difficulties of target state recognition in cognitive electronic warfare are reflected in the following three aspects:

(1)	Target signal threat perception in cognitive electronic warfare faces a "small sample space." Conventional artificial intelligence algorithms mostly require sufficient training samples to ensure algorithm performance. However, due to tactical usage and technical conditions, cognitive electronic warfare systems can only intercept a small amount of sample information of the target in a short period of time. In particular, for unknown threat radiation sources, their signal samples can only be obtained through online reconnaissance during the confrontation process.
(2) Target signal threat perception in cognitive electronic countermeasures is an “incremental” identification method[12-14]On the one hand, in cognitive electronic warfare, the warfare system continuously emits jamming signals to interact with the external environment, while also continuously receiving signals transmitted by the target, forming an "incremental" signal "data stream." On the other hand, without any interaction, some operating modes or anti-jamming measures of the warfare target may be "hidden." This requires the warfare system to be able to adapt to and identify new states of the target, even new targets that have never been seen before.

(3) Target signal threat perception in cognitive electronic countermeasures presents multiple "uncertainties." Due to the complexity of the electromagnetic environment and the inevitable measurement errors of reconnaissance systems, it is sometimes impossible to obtain the precise values of the radiation source signal parameters or even the complete signal parameter vector. In other words, electromagnetic signal samples may exhibit uncertainty characteristic parameters such as interval or incomplete parameters. Therefore, it is necessary to study models or algorithms that can adapt to this uncertainty information.

3.2 Cognition-based Interference Strategy Optimization
3.2.1 Technical Content
Cognition-based jamming strategy optimization is the embodiment of cognitive electronic warfare systems' adaptive countermeasures and is also the core advantage of cognitive electronic warfare technology.

Jamming strategy optimization in cognitive electronic warfare specifically encompasses three aspects: jamming pattern decision-making, jamming waveform optimization, and jamming resource scheduling. Jamming pattern decision-making involves the ability of the adversary system to establish optimal correspondences between various states of the adversary target and existing jamming patterns through threat perception of the target signal, thereby developing an optimal jamming strategy for each target state. Jamming strategy optimization involves the ability of the adversary system to fully utilize its own jamming resources based on changes in the external electromagnetic environment, autonomously, dynamically, and in real time optimizing and generating new jamming waveforms. This creates flexible and diverse jamming patterns to adapt to the complex electromagnetic environment of modern electronic warfare. Jamming resource scheduling involves the rational allocation of jamming resources under "many-to-many" adversarial conditions, enabling the adversary system to maximize the operational effectiveness of its own jamming resources against the target's networked information system.

3.2.2 Problems to be solved
(1) Adaptive jamming pattern decision-making for multiple target states. The adversarial targets in cognitive electronic warfare often have multiple operating states, which can switch rapidly during the adversarial process. Therefore, the adversarial system needs to be able to establish the optimal correspondence between the target state and the existing jamming pattern through adaptive jamming pattern decision-making, so as to be able to quickly respond to the flexibly changing targets.

(2) Optimization of jamming waveforms for unknown threat targets or unknown target states. When an unknown threat target or unknown target state appears during the confrontation process, the existing jamming pattern may not achieve the best jamming effect. In this case, the confrontation system needs to dynamically adjust the jamming parameters and optimize the jamming waveform based on the signal characteristics of the unknown state detected and perceived, thereby generating a new jamming pattern.

(3) Adaptive jamming resource scheduling in “many-to-many” confrontation. Building on the optimization of jamming waveforms in “one-to-one” confrontation, we further investigate the jamming resource scheduling problem in “many-to-many” confrontation. Based on cognitive theory, we study the implementation mechanism of resource allocation and scheduling in the confrontation, minimizing the system’s reliance on humans and prior knowledge and maximizing the resource utilization efficiency of the confrontation system.

3.2.3 Basic methods and difficulties
(1) Adaptive interference pattern decision-making can be solved by reinforcement learning technology. Reinforcement learning is an important learning method in the field of artificial intelligence.[15]It uses trial and error to learn how to optimally match states and actions to maximize rewards. Reinforcement learning has the ability to learn autonomously. It does not rely on prior knowledge, but acquires knowledge through continuous interaction with the environment, autonomously selecting actions. This strengthens rewarded behaviors and weakens penalized ones. Common reinforcement learning algorithms include dynamic programming, temporal difference learning, Monte Carlo methods, and Q-learning.

(2) Intelligent optimization algorithms can be used to optimize jamming waveforms. Existing intelligent optimization methods mainly include genetic algorithms, simulated annealing algorithms, particle swarm optimization algorithms, differential evolution algorithms, and fast multi-layer multipole algorithms. Under cognitive electronic warfare conditions, the optimization process needs to consider many factors, such as the threat level of the target, matching jamming strategies, and jamming implementation parameters. Improving traditional algorithms and implementing mathematical models are key aspects of algorithm development.

(3) In terms of jamming resource scheduling, existing algorithms include the Hungarian algorithm, dynamic programming algorithm, fuzzy multi-attribute dynamic programming algorithm, etc. Cognitive electronic countermeasure systems place higher demands on the intelligent implementation of jamming resource scheduling. It is necessary to research new algorithms or improve and promote existing algorithms to adapt to the complex modern battlefield environment. For example, as the number of countermeasure targets increases and even networks are formed, most jammers also have the ability to jam multiple targets. It is possible to study jamming scheduling algorithms that combine autonomous learning knowledge bases and pre-installed expert systems to make them applicable to the modern complex battlefield environment of "many-to-many" confrontation.

Cognitive adversarial systems place high demands on the real-time performance of jamming systems. Enabling them to rapidly optimize cognitive jamming strategies is a technical challenge, necessitating research into strategies to improve the learning efficiency of traditional intelligent algorithms. On the one hand, to enhance the convergence of algorithms, a combination of direct and indirect reinforcement learning can be explored for adaptive jamming pattern decision-making. On the other hand, in a "many-to-many" adversarial environment, pre-allocation of jamming resources can be used to provide reinforcement learning algorithms with a certain amount of prior information, improving their learning efficiency.

3.3 Evaluation of Interference Effects of Spectral Learning Inference
3.3.1 Technical Content
Effectiveness evaluation, also known as effectiveness measurement, encompasses two components: effectiveness measurement methods and criteria. These methods and criteria are closely related to the purpose of the evaluation. Different experimental objectives require different methods. In the field of electronic countermeasures, jamming effect refers to the interference, damage, or destruction caused by electronic countermeasure equipment on the target (such as radar or communications equipment).

The essence of cognition is a closed-loop process of "incentive-feedback-correction." In cognitive countermeasures, the jammer must determine whether the target undergoes desired changes in operating parameters and modes under the influence of the corresponding jamming measures. The results of these jamming effects directly reflect the effectiveness of the jamming measures implemented by the electronic countermeasures system and serve as the basis for jamming pattern decision-making and waveform optimization within the cognitive electronic countermeasures loop.

3.3.2 Problems to be solved
Jamming effect evaluation technology in cognitive electronic countermeasures performs real-time target state recognition, assessing changes in the target's state before and after jamming. Combining this with other prior knowledge acquired by the jammer, it conducts online assessment of the jamming effect and subsequently formulates and adjusts the optimal jamming strategy for the radar. This enables self-feedback during the jamming process, ultimately reducing system response time and improving comprehensive jamming capabilities.

The key issues to be addressed by this technology include:
(1) Design of an interference effect evaluation index system based on target signal analysis;
(2) Establishment of jamming effect evaluation model based on reconnaissance model;
(3) Research and improvement of interference effect evaluation methods.

3.3.3 Basic methods and difficulties
A lot of research has been carried out at home and abroad on the evaluation of interference effects. According to the interference pattern and the type of interfered object, various interference effect evaluation criteria have been proposed, such as power criterion, probability criterion, efficiency criterion, etc. [16-18] However, these evaluation criteria are essentially based on the perspective of the partner, the interfered system itself. In this case, the various parameters and workflows of the interfered system are fully known. The resulting resource consumption and changes in performance indicators after the interference is observable, allowing for a relatively good assessment of the interference effect and its ability to resist interference.

In actual combat environments, it's impossible for the jammer to obtain these evaluation values directly from the enemy target. Cognitive electronic countermeasures systems require an assessment of jamming effectiveness from the jammer's perspective to better meet the needs of electronic warfare. Specifically, cognitive electronic countermeasures systems can perform online jamming effectiveness assessments by analyzing the changes in the jammed target's state before and after the jamming, based on the signal information the jammer can detect and detect, and combining this with an analysis of the target's threat level.

Jamming effectiveness assessment technology for cognitive electronic systems also places high demands on processing time. The assessment algorithm must be able to rapidly adapt to changes in the jamming environment and the state of the countermeasure target. It is possible to explore the use of algorithms such as artificial neural networks in jamming effectiveness assessment to derive a functional relationship between jamming strategies and jamming effectiveness values in a given environment. In this context, jamming effectiveness assessment can simply be performed by substituting the jamming strategy into the functional relationship to obtain the corresponding jamming effectiveness value, thereby improving the efficiency of jamming effectiveness assessment in cognitive electronic countermeasures.


4 Summary
With the development of artificial intelligence theory and electronic technology, more advanced machine learning algorithms and technologies will continue to emerge. Cognitive electronic warfare technology will gradually mature and enter application. This will improve electronic warfare systems' ability to perceive threat signals, make jamming decisions, and assess jamming effects. It will also shorten jamming response times to unknown threats and accelerate the electronic warfare environment perception-adaptation-decision-action (OODA) loop, enhancing the agility of electronic warfare and significantly improving the combat capabilities of electronic warfare systems.

1 Conceptual connotation and research status
2 Cognitive Electronic Warfare Architecture
3 Key technologies
4 Summary

References
[1] Xiong Qunli. Integrated Electronic Warfare: The Ultimate Weapon of Informationized Warfare. Beijing: National Defense Industry Press, 2008.
[2] Wu LM, Wang MX, Chen G, et al. Introduction to cognitive radio and communication electronic warfare. Beijing: Publishing House of Electronics Industry, 2015.
[3] Zhang K, Zhang X, Jin J C. Preliminary exploration of cognitive electronic warfare. Aero Elec Warfare, 2013, 29: 53--56.
[4] DARPA. Behavioral learning for adaptive electronic warfare (BLADE) broad agency announcement (BAA). DARPA-BAA-10-79, 2010-07-09. http://www.darpa.mil/i2o/ solicit /solicit-closed.asp.
[5] Lee-Urban S, Trewhitt E, Bieder I, et al. CORA: a flexible hybrid approach to building cognitive systems. In: Proceedings of Annual Conference on Advances in Cognitive Systems, 2015. 1--16.
[6] DARPA. Adaptive radar countermeasures (ARC) broad agency announcement (BAA). DARPA-BAA-12-54, 2012-08-27. http://www.darpa.mil.
[7] AFRL. Cognitive jammer. RFI-PKS-0001-2010, 2010. http://www.fbo.gov.2010.
[8] NAVY. Cognitive electronic warfare program. ONRBAA13-005, 2013. http://www.onr.navy.mil/Contracts-Grants/Funding-Opportunities/Broad-Agency-Announcements.aspx.
[9] Ni CY, Huang H. Research into the composition and crucial technologies of cognitive electronic warfare system. Shipboard Elec Countermeasure, 2013, 36: 32--35.
[10] Fan ZL, Zhu GS, Hu Y K. An overview of cognitive electronic warfare. Elec Inf Warfare Tech, 2015, 30: 33--38.
[11] Gavrilovska L, Atanasovski V, Macaluso I . Learning and Reasoning in Cognitive Radio Networks. IEEE Commun Surv Tutorials , 2013 , 15 : 1761 -1777
[12] Lau KW, Wu QH . Online training of support vector classifier. Pattern Recognition , 2003 , 36 : 1913 -1920
[13] Masud MM, Chen Q, Khan L . Classification and Adaptive Novel Class Detection of Feature-Evolving Data Streams. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng , 2013 , 25 : 1484 -1497
[14] Mu X, Zhu F, Du J, et al. Streaming classification with emerging new class by class matrix sketching. In: Proceedings of the 31st AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, San Francisco, 2017. 2373--2379.
[15] Sutton RS, Barto A G. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. Cambridge: IMIT Press, 1998.
[16] Liu CF, Zhao Z Y. Method of evaluating countermeasure effectiveness for an adaptive nulling antenna based on the analytic hierarchy process. J Xidian Univ (Nat Sci), 2015, 42: 25--31.
[17] Zhang Jian. Military Equipment System Effectiveness Analysis, Optimization and Simulation. Beijing: National Defense Industry Press, 2002.
[18] Zhang Jieru. Estimation of jamming effect of electronic countermeasure system. Aeronautics and Astronautics, 1997, 3: 12-17.
