Technical  Volume: POLARIS (Platform for Operational Lifecycle, Algorithmic Research, and Integration in SDA-Operations)
1. Identification and Significance  of the Problem or Opportunity 
The POLARIS project aims to address critical challenges in transitioning Space Domain Awareness (SDA) basic research algorithms into operational use within the United States Space Force (USSF). AFOSR has been collaborating with the Space Systems Command (SSC) TAP Lab and the Space Operations Command (SpOC) to identify research algorithms with potential to significantly improve SDA capabilities for monitoring satellites in Earth orbits. However, these algorithms from various universities have been tested on different platforms using diverse data sources, making integration and operational transition difficult. 
Our proposed solution, POLARIS, addresses these limitations by providing a comprehensive, validated simulation environment that seamlessly integrates high-fidelity simulations with diverse real-world data sources, enabling robust evaluation of SDA algorithms. POLARIS leverages our TRL2 NGSX high-fidelity space simulator, TRL2 SIERO validated EW simulator, and TRL9 ARAKNID multi-domain C2 algorithm comparison framework as the foundation for creating a unified platform for researchers to thoroughly test their algorithms under operational conditions. The system also significantly reduces costs and risks associated with transition with its software-in-the-loop (SITL) simulation framework, and easy integration into our TRL9 hardware-in-the-loop (HITL) testbeds. Additionally, POLARIS establishes a standardized method for testing and evaluating SDA algorithms, ensuring their smooth transition from research to operational deployment within the USSF. The framework will also automatically evaluate candidate algorithm performance against USSF 3TES Squadron technology transition processes/requirements, further reducing risk and confusion with algorithm transitions.
Our proposal closely addresses the key challenges outlined in the "Into the Wild - Transitioning Basic Rsh Algs to Ops" solicitation. Our team, consisting of experts from Interactive Aptitude LLC, University of Colorado Boulder's AVS Lab, and Virginia Tech's National Security Institute, is uniquely qualified to develop the POLARIS system given our proven track record in delivering advanced simulation and autonomy solutions for space operations across various DoD programs. The POLARIS project will build upon our team's extensive experience in developing high-fidelity space simulators (NGSX and ARAKNID), validated EW simulators (SIERO), spacecraft autonomy algorithms (CU Boulder's TRL4 Basilisk and Virginia Tech's TRL2 RESONAATE), and 15+ nanosat mission successes including HITL testing. By leveraging our expertise in simulator development, SDA solutions, and user-centric design, we aim to deliver a cutting-edge platform that empowers researchers and operators to effectively develop, test, and deploy SDA algorithms for operational use.
Figure 1 provides an overview of the POLARIS framework, illustrating how it facilitates the integration, testing, and deployment of SDA algorithms through a validated simulation environment, incorporating standardized algorithm testing and compliance with USSF standards. Table 1 summarizes the key challenges and our proposed innovations to address them, which are discussed in further detail in Sections 2 and 3.
 
Figure 1: The POLARIS framework provides stakeholder-prioritized initiation of algorithm tests, a validated simulation environment with standardized/cost-effective algorithm testing, and integrated compliance checks for USSF deployment.

Table 1: Existing Technical Challenges and POLARIS Innovations
Challenge Topic	POLARIS Innovation 
Validated Simulation Environment

Researchers currently lack a comprehensive set of validated/accredited simulation environments to easily integrate, test, and evaluate their algorithms that consider consider relevant, real-world operations data	Testing and evaluating SDA algorithms against real-world operations data is crucial to operational transition. AFSIM and similar government-open-source DoD simulators suffer from low-fidelity assumptions of critical space physics, causing algorithms to not perform as expected in operational scenarios, risking mission success. AFSIM and similar simulators also do not easily integrate with diverse high-fidelity data sources, further inhibiting their abilities to represent realistic scenarios. Current methods rely on either synthetic data or isolated environments, limiting their applicability. Our proposed effort provides a comprehensive testing framework by expanding our high-fidelity TRL2 NGSX space simulator and TRL2 SIERO validated EW simulator for seamless integration of diverse SDA algorithms and data sources such as UDL  and JCO-packaged data.  This approach uniquely combines real-world data with high-fidelity simulations, enabling robust evaluation. POLARIS offers a unified platform for researchers to thoroughly test their algorithms under operational conditions, enhancing reliability and performance.
Cost-Effective Algorithm Testing

Difficult and expensive to test algorithms on representative spacecraft and ground station hardware	Validating algorithms on representative spacecraft and ground station hardware is costly and impractical, limiting thorough testing. High costs and limited availability of test hardware are major barriers. Traditional methods are either prohibitively expensive or offer limited fidelity. POLARIS expands on our TRL2 NGSX space simulator and its software-in-the-loop (SITL) architecture, allowing for containerized sub-components and seamless transition to our team’s hardware-in-the-loop (HITL) testbed, reducing costs and risks. Our testbed has historical in-orbit mission successes with 15+ spacecraft including CSSWE, MinXSS, and QB50-Challenger.  We will also integrate POLARIS SITL features with physical spacecraft programs we have close connections with, to further reduce cost and risk of algorithm transition to our team to reduce cost of transition. Physical spacecraft emulation programs include: Aerospace Corporation’s robotic manipulator arm testing, AFRL/RV Space Vehicles Directorate quadcopter spacecraft emulation lab, and SSCI POET in-orbit spacecraft  able to overwrite the operating system with new mission-level C2 logic. Ground-based observation testing will also occur via our close relationship with the current TRL9 MACHINA state-of-the-practice for automated ground tasking, deployed at Haleakala Observatory,  in part supported by our team. The POLARIS system will also be designed to run within classified software/data/networks, to minimize any transition delays. 
Standardized Algorithm Testing

Demonstrating a method to transition a set of algorithms into USSF operations	Transitioning algorithms from research to USSF operations requires a standardized method. Without it, promising algorithms may not be deployed, hindering advancements in SDA. The challenges include developing a consistent evaluation process and ensuring robustness. We will expand on our TRL9 ARAKNID multi-domain C2 work which integrated and evaluated performance of various algorithms in choosing the best quality F2T2EA modeling effects. Following ARAKNID  algorithm testing architecture, as the first proof-of-concept, POLARIS will integrate SDA tasking algorithms from CU Boulder's AVS Lab, as well as SDA tracking algorithms from Virginia Tech’s National Security Institute. Our past successful work with CU Boulder, Virginia Tech, and similar projects shows our ability to standardize and transition algorithms to higher TRL levels effectively. POLARIS will also offer a common simulation environment for standardized performance scoring and comparison of similar algorithms. This method fosters collaboration and smooth transition to operational use. POLARIS provides a platform for consistent evaluation and operational deployment of SDA algorithms. 
USSF Compliance Pathways

Ensure we meet the specific USSF transition requirements and provide/advertise a pathway for transitioning basic research algorithms to SDA operations	Meeting USSF transition requirements is critical for algorithm deployment. Non-compliance can result in rejection and operational setbacks. Navigating these processes and ensuring comprehensive documentation are significant challenges. Existing solutions often struggle with the complexity of these requirements. POLARIS aligns with USSF 3TES transition processes/requirements SPFI13-60  and AFI99-103,  offering automated reporting and compliance with USSF’s Front Door process.  Our approach simplifies compliance, facilitating smooth algorithm transition. Our experience with USSF processes and successful past transitions with TRL9 ARAKNID, and successes with 15+ spacecraft missions,  ensures we can meet these complex requirements. POLARIS provides a streamlined pathway for researchers to transition their algorithms to operational use, ensuring compliance and facilitating deployment.
2 . Phase I Technical Objectives  
The POLARIS framework provides stakeholder-prioritized initiation of SDA algorithm tests, a validated simulation environment with standardized/cost-effective algorithm testing, and integrated compliance checks for USSF deployment. Polaris aims to support a variety of SDA end use-cases, including:
1.	Single/multi-spacecraft autonomy development/test for virtual, constructive, and live scenarios
2.	Adversary modeling; Wargaming R&D; Force structure identification
3.	Space cataloging of all friendly and adversary spacecraft for efficient BMC3; Training of spacecraft operators
POLARIS  facilitates the integration, testing, and deployment of Space Domain Awareness (SDA) algorithms through a validated simulation environment. As illustrated in Figure 2, the POLARIS framework incorporates standardized algorithm testing and ensures compliance with USSF standards. The solution leverages basic and advanced SDA research algorithms from various institutions, The POLARIS validated simulator serves as the core component, enabling the seamless integration and evaluation of these diverse algorithms. Interactive web pages allow end-users to initiate simulations, view results, and interact with the system in real-time, enhancing usability and accessibility.
POLARIS Solution Architecture
 
Figure 2: The POLARIS framework facilitates integration, testing, and deployment of SDA algorithms through the POLARIS validated simulator, which incorporates standardized algorithm testing and compliance with USSF standards. Interactive web pages allow end-users to initiate simulations, view results, and interact with the system in real-time. The solution leverages basic and advanced SDA research algorithms from various institutions, including CU AVS Lab's high-fidelity multi-spacecraft simulator, Virginia Tech's RESONAATE algorithms for RSO orbit determination and maneuver detection, GMU's adversary hypothesis management algorithms, and UC Santa Barbara's Pattern of Life algorithms, among others.

The POLARIS Phase I work will aim to meet the following objectives:
1.	Identify high-technical-risk components in developing a comprehensive, validated simulation environment by expanding the TRL2 NGSX space simulator and TRL2 SIERO validated EW simulator. This will enable validated simulations, along with seamless integration of diverse SDA algorithms and data sources, such as UDL and JCO-packaged data.
a.	Research Question: Can the expanded simulators effectively combine real-world data with high-fidelity, validated, simulations for robust algorithm evaluation?
b.	Feasibility Determination: The expanded simulators will be considered feasible if they can successfully integrate at least two SDA algorithms and two different data sources (e.g., UDL and JCO-packaged data) while maintaining a simulation accuracy of 90% or higher when compared to real-world scenarios.
2.	Establish a cost-effective algorithm testing approach by leveraging the TRL2 NGSX space simulator's software-in-the-loop (SITL) architecture and integrating with hardware-in-the-loop (HITL) testbeds and physical spacecraft programs.
a.	Research Question: How effectively can the SITL features be integrated with physical spacecraft programs to reduce the cost and risk of algorithm transition?
b.	Feasibility Determination: The SITL features will be considered effectively integrated if they are adequately separated into subsystems of a standard HITL simulator, such as the comms interface, bus interface, and payload interface.
3.	Create a standardized method for transitioning algorithms from research to USSF operations, building upon the TRL9 ARAKNID multi-domain C2 work. Integrate SDA tasking algorithms from CU Boulder's AVS Lab and SDA tracking algorithms from Virginia Tech's National Security Institute as proof-of-concept.
a.	Research Question: Can the POLARIS platform provide a consistent evaluation process and ensure robustness for smooth transition to operational use?
b.	Feasibility Determination: The POLARIS platform will be considered feasible if it can successfully integrate and evaluate the performance of at least two SDA tasking algorithms (e.g., from CU Boulder's AVS Lab) and two SDA tracking algorithms (e.g., from Virginia Tech's National Security Institute) using standardized performance metrics.
4.	Ensure compliance with USSF transition requirements (SPFI13-60 and AFI99-103) by aligning with USSF 3TES transition processes, offering automated reporting, and integrating with the SSC Front Door process.
a.	Research Question: Will the POLARIS system successfully meet the complex USSF transition requirements and facilitate smooth algorithm deployment?
b.	Feasibility Determination: The POLARIS system will be considered compliant if it successfully provides feedback within the system on at least 80% of the USSF 3TES transition processes/requirements (per SPFI13-60 and AFI99-103), generating automated reports that inform the algorithm developers on areas lacking compliance, and integrates easily with the SSC Front Door process.
5.	Develop user interfaces that allow end-users to initiate simulations, view results, and interact with the system in real-time, enhancing usability and accessibility.
a.	Research Question: How effectively can the user interfaces enhance user engagement and facilitate the use of the POLARIS framework?
b.	Feasibility Determination: The user interface will be considered effective if they achieve a user satisfaction score of 80% or higher, based on surveys assessing the ease of initiating simulations, viewing results, and interacting with the system with minimal, less than 0.1 second, latency.
The Phase I effort will focus on answering these questions to determine the feasibility of the proposed approach and lay the groundwork for successful development and implementation of the POLARIS framework.
3 . Phase I Statement of Work (Including Subcontractors’ Efforts)
In this section, we will provide a description of the Phase 1 approach based on a foundation of relevant prior work, covering the following POLARIS system features: validated simulation environment, cost-effective algorithm testing, standardized algorithm testing, USSF compliance pathways, and Phase I transition algorithms.
3.1. Validated Simulation Environment
The POLARIS framework will provide a comprehensive and validated simulation environment for testing and evaluating SDA algorithms. This environment addresses the challenges faced by researchers in integrating, testing, and evaluating their algorithms against real-world operations data, which is crucial for operational transition. POLARIS  will build on our developed simulators, namely TRL2 NGSX for SDA simulations, and TRL2 SIERO for a validation process of the simulator against live test data. Figure 3 illustrates our NGSX High-Fidelity SDA Simulator, which overcomes the limitations of existing DoD space simulators in terms of spacecraft operations and SDA scenario fidelity. NGSX enables researchers and developers to easily create scenarios, solutions, and user interfaces using Python and a visual development interface. The simulator combines the open-source Basilisk Astrodynamics Simulator with Unreal Engine for user interface development and integrates directly with UDL SDA data. A plugin manager allows for the addition of capabilities as needed, depending on the use case.
SIERO validated simulation technologies currently simulates multi-domain Electronic Warfare (EW) wargaming scenarios. As shown in Figure 4, SIERO integrates various friendly/adversary parameter and signal data sources, considering effects such as communications, sensing, electronic attack, and electronic protect. The Uncertainty Evaluation Engine determines the simulation accuracy by comparing it to live test data with a similar initial world state. This approach supports the development of friendly force decision-making by providing platform-level Cognitive EW capabilities and enterprise multi-domain C2 systems to counter in-flight threats effectively, without the costly needs for live test. Figure 5 demonstrates the SIERO Radar Simulation Error Quantification process, which compares various parameter combinations to live test data to quantify the accuracy of the radar simulator. The lowest error variations in the simulation results are assumed to be more accurate and can be further investigated to quantify the overall model accuracy within the simulator.
The POLARIS validated simulation environment, built off the NGSX High-Fidelity SDA Simulator and the SIERO Validated Simulator, offers a unified platform for researchers to thoroughly test their algorithms under operational conditions. This approach enhances the reliability and performance of the algorithms, facilitating a smooth transition to operational use in the USSF.
NGSX High-Fidelity SDA Simulator
  
Figure 3:  Existing DoD space simulators have drawbacks with fidelity of spacecraft operations and SDA scenarios, making it difficult to research/develop space BMC3, autonomy, and operator workflow/training solutions. NGSX addresses these drawbacks, allowing researchers and developers to easily create scenarios/solutions/UI’s in Python and a visual development interface. Depending on the use case, a plugin manager provides the ability to enable additional capabilities as needed. NGSX combines the high-fidelity open-source Basilisk Astrodynamics Simulator with Unreal Engine user interface development, plus existing data integration directly with UDL SDA data.
SIERO Validated Simulator with Reports of  Uncertainty-Tracking per TEA/Live Data
 
Figure 4: SIERO simulates multi-domain EW (Electronic Warfare) wargaming scenarios, integrating a variety of friendly parameter and signals data sources. We consider effects including communications, sensing, electronic attack, and electronic protect. The Uncertainty Evaluation Engine determines simulation accuracy compared to live test data of a similar simulation initial state. The approach supports development of friendly force decision-making by both providing platform-level Cognitive EW capabilities and enterprise multi-domain C2 systems to effectively counter in-flight threats.



SIERO Radar Simulation Error Quantification When Compared to Test Data
 
Figure 5: We compare various parameter combinations to live test data to quantify accuracy of the radar simulator. Lowest error variations of simulation results are assumed to be more accurate, and can be investigated further to quantify the overall model accuracy within the simulator.
3.2. Cost-Effective Algorithm Testing
POLARIS addresses the challenge of cost-effectively testing algorithms on representative spacecraft and ground station hardware. As depicted in Figure 6, POLARIS expands on our TRL2 NGSX space simulator and its software-in-the-loop (SITL) architecture, allowing for containerized sub-components and seamless transition to our team's hardware-in-the-loop (HITL) testbed. This approach reduces costs and risks associated with validating algorithms on physical hardware. Our testbed has a proven track record of success, with historical mission successes involving 15+ spacecraft including CSSWE, MinXSS, and QB50-Challenger, as part of the University Nanosat program through this proposal's team at the University of Colorado.
We also use our SIERO simulator’s process to develop software-in-the-loop digital twin capabilities as opposed to using hardware-in-the-loop to reduce costs. The process begins by verifying digital twin performance against radar hardware in test and processing hardware output data into the simulator's format. The M&S tool's uncertainty is then evaluated by comparing simulation output to normalized test data. If the digital twin accuracy is verified and deemed acceptable, the software pipeline can be tested using the Digital Twin instead of the radar hardware in test, thereby reducing costs. The accuracy of test data processing and simulation can be further increased through leveraging possibly more accurate models and employing the "Trial and Error" approach. 
 
Figure 6: POLARIS’s software-in-the-loop (SITL) architecture allows for containerized sub-components and seamless transition to our team’s hardware-in-the-loop (HITL) testbed, reducing costs and risks. Our testbed has historical mission successes with 15+ spacecraft including CSSWE, MinXSS, and QB50-Challenger, as part of the University Nanosat program through this proposal’s team at University of Colorado.
We will also integrate POLARIS SITL features with physical spacecraft programs we have close connections with, to further reduce cost and risk of algorithm transition to our team to reduce cost of transition. Physical spacecraft emulation programs include: Aerospace Corporation’s robotic manipulator arm testing, AFRL/RV Space Vehicles Directorate quadcopter spacecraft emulation lab, and SSCI POET in-orbit spacecraft able to overwrite the operating system with new mission-level C2 logic. Ground-based observation testing will also occur via our close relationship with the current state-of-the-practice for automated ground tasking, i.e. MACHINA, in part supported by our team. The POLARIS system will also be designed to run within classified software/data/networks, to minimize any transition delays. 
SIERO Process Flow to Develop Software-in-the-Loop Digital Twin Capabilities as Opposed to using Hardware-in-the-Loop to Reduce Costs
 
Figure 7: We portray the SIERO process flow to develop software-in-the-loop digital twin capabilities as opposed to using hardware-in-the-loop to reduce costs. The process involves verifying digital twin performance against radar hardware in test (1), processing hardware output data into the simulator's format (2), evaluating the M&S tool's uncertainty by comparing simulation output to normalized test data (3), and increasing the accuracy of test data processing and simulation through leveraging possibly more accurate models and the "Trial and Error" approach (4). If the digital twin accuracy is verified and acceptable, the software pipeline can be tested with the Digital Twin instead of the radar hardware in test.
3.3.  Standardized Algorithm Testing
Transitioning algorithms from research to USSF operations requires a standardized method. Without it, promising algorithms may not be deployed, hindering advancements in SDA. The challenges include developing a consistent evaluation process and ensuring robustness. We will expand on our TRL9 ARAKNID multi-domain C2 work which integrated and evaluated the performance of various algorithms in choosing the best quality F2T2EA modeling effects. Following the ARAKNID algorithm testing architecture, as the first proof-of-concept, POLARIS will integrate SDA tasking algorithms from CU Boulder's AVS Lab, as well as SDA tracking algorithms from Virginia Tech’s National Security Institute. Our past successful work with CU Boulder, Virginia Tech, and similar projects shows our ability to standardize and transition algorithms to higher TRL levels effectively. POLARIS will also offer a common simulation environment for standardized performance scoring and comparison of similar algorithms. This method fosters collaboration and smooth transition to operational use. POLARIS provides a platform for consistent evaluation and operational deployment of SDA algorithms.
The first POLARIS proof-of-concept will focus on spacecraft autonomy algorithms as they relate to SDA. More specifically, POLARIS will integrate various basic research algorithms developed by CU Boulder's AVS Lab and Virginia Tech for SDA space-to-space sensing operations, namely: optimized tasking, raw sensor data processing, and tracking/maneuver-detection of RSOs (resident space objects). POLARIS provides a common simulation environment to run these algorithms and determines standardized scores on the performance of these basic research algorithms, for comparison to existing state-of-the-practice algorithms (MACHINA tasking/exploitation, etc.), as well as additional experimental algorithms. The platform will serve as a standardized environment for researchers to contribute their own algorithms, enabling comparison and fostering collaboration.
3.4. USSF Compliance Pathways
POLARIS is designed to meet the specific USSF transition requirements and provide a clear pathway for transitioning basic research algorithms to SDA operations. As shown in Figure 8, POLARIS integrates the engineering "V" diagram for modeling & simulation verification against test data, and determines the pathway to deployment to operations. The "Subsystem Verification Plan" (1) supports many vs. many wargaming scenarios, while the "Unit Test Plan" (2) focuses on 1v1 interactions. Tracking real-world errors from operations and field exercises (3) is crucial for validating and refining the M&S design. For M&S development, we ensure the test data meets Subsystem verification and Unit tests. The standard Engineering "V" diagram is also used to comply with USSF deployment strategies.
POLARIS aligns with USSF 3TES transition processes/requirements SPFI13-60 “System Acceptance” and AFI99-103 “Capabilities-Based Test and Evaluation,” offering automated reporting and compliance with USSF's Front Door process. Our approach simplifies compliance, facilitating smooth algorithm transition. We will work with the administrators of SSC, Bluestaq LLC, and KBR Inc., to upgrade their Onboarding Enterprise Tool for facilitating engagements of businesses and universities to transition their basic research algorithms into the USSF, particularly integrating POLARIS simulations. Our experience with USSF processes and successful past transitions with TRL9 ARAKNID, and 15+ spacecraft missions including CSSWE, MinXSS, and QB50-Challenger, ensures we can meet these complex requirements. POLARIS provides a streamlined pathway for researchers to transition their algorithms to operational use, ensuring compliance and facilitating deployment.
Engineering “V” Diagram for Modeling & Simulation (M&S) Verification Against Test Data, and Pathway to Deployment to Operations
 
Figure 8: POLARIS will integrate the engineering “V” diagram for M&S verification against test data, and in determining the pathway to deployment to operations. The "Subsystem Verification Plan" (1) supports many vs. many wargaming scenarios, while the "Unit Test Plan" (2) focuses on 1v1 interactions. Tracking real-world errors from operations and field exercises (3) is crucial for validating and refining the M&S design. For M&S development, we ensure the test data meets Subsystem verification and Unit tests. The standard Engineering “V” diagram will also be used to comply with USSF deployment strategies. 
3.5. Phase I Transition Algorithms
The first POLARIS proof-of-concept will focus on spacecraft autonomy algorithms as they relate to SDA. More specifically, POLARIS will integrate basic research algorithms developed by CU Boulder's AVS Lab and Virginia Tech for SDA space-to-space sensing operations, namely: optimized tasking and tracking/maneuver-detection of RSOs (resident space objects). POLARIS provides a common simulation environment to run these algorithms and determines standardized scores on the performance of these basic research algorithms, for comparison to existing state-of-the-practice algorithms (MACHINA tasking/exploitation, etc.), as well as additional experimental algorithms. 
During the Phase I, we will transition CU’s  basic research algorithms into POLARIS, for optimized space sensor tasking considering high-fidelity constraints such as momentum wheel saturation, battery levels, and data storage. Figure 6 provides examples of these optimized tasking algorithms, namely a Shielded Deep Reinforcement Learning approach, for target pointing and tracking developed with Interactive Aptitude LLC and University of Colorado on program CMA-SHIELD. We will transition this algorithm, developed within Basilisk  (which serves as part of the backend simulation framework for NGSX and POLARIS) plus other basic research algorithms developed by CU Boulder's AVS Lab for SDA space-to-space sensing operation.
During the Phase I, we will also transition Virginia Tech’s basic research algorithms into POLARIS, We will transition Virginia Tech basic research algorithms, namely those developed within the RESONAATE (Responsive Space Observation Analysis & Autonomous Tasking Engine)  software, providing algorithms for low-fidelity space/ground sensor tasking, initial orbit determinations, maneuver detection, and target reacquisition. Drawbacks of the RESONAATE framework include slow computation speeds, lack of fidelity, and no path to validation of the simulation, all of which will be addressed as we transition the algorithms into the POLARIS simulation framework.
CU Basic Research Algorithm to Transition: High-Fidelity Optimized Tasking of Space Sensors
 
Figure 9: Visualization of separate timesteps of an optimized tasking algorithm for target pointing and tracking developed with Interactive Aptitude LLC and University of Colorado on program CMA-SHIELD. We will transition this algorithm developed within Basilisk plus other basic research algorithms developed by CU Boulder's AVS Lab for SDA space-to-space sensing operations, namely: raw sensor data processing and tracking/maneuver-detection of RSOs (resident space objects).
Virginia Tech Basic Research Algorithms to Transition: Low-Fidelity Space/Ground Sensor Tasking, Initial Orbit Determinations, Maneuver Detection, and Target Reacquisition
 
Figure 10: We will transition Virginia Tech basic research algorithms, namely those developed within the RESONAATE (Responsive Space Observation Analysis & Autonomous Tasking Engine) software, providing algorithms for low-fidelity space/ground sensor tasking, initial orbit determinations, maneuver detection, and target reacquisition. 
3.6. Work Plan
Phase I will consist of POLARIS prototype development, along with integration of University of Colorado SDA tasking algorithms and Virginia Tech SDA tracking algorithms into POLARIS. Table 3 below displays our proposed Work Plan Outline, and the final products to be delivered.
Table  3: Work Plan
Scope	Task Outline*	Deliverables	Milestone
Schedule
USSF Transition Pathway	Identify needs and pathways for transitioning the proposed POLARIS solutions, namely its standardized simulator and basic research algorithms (namely high-fidelity SDA tasking and SDA tracking). Hold meetings with stakeholders including the SDA TAP Lab, SSC Front Door administrators, and aligning USSF the 3TES squadron on their transition processes and requirements (SPFI13-60 and AFI99-103).	Progress Report, and Resulting Gov-Open-Source Prototype Code	Award + 2 months
Develop Simulation Environment	Expand the NGSX space simulator and SIERO simulator’s validation techniques to develop the POLARIS standardized simulator, to provide seamless integration of diverse SDA algorithms and data sources. 	Progress Report, and Resulting Gov-Open-Source Prototype Code	Award + 4 months
Standardized Algorithm Testing	Integrate CU Boulder's AVS Lab tasking algorithms and Virginia Tech's SDA tracking algorithms into POLARIS as a proof-of-concept. Determine feasibility by successfully integrating and evaluating the performance of at least two SDA tasking algorithms and two SDA tracking algorithms using standardized performance metrics.	Final Report with SF 298, and Resulting Gov-Open-Source Prototype Code	Award + 6 months
* All work will be performed by Interactive Aptitude LLC, University of Colorado, and Virginia Tech employees at our facilities
 
Figure 11: Phase I Schedule of Major Events
All Phase I work is proposed to be performed at Interactive Aptitude LLC, University of Colorado, and Virginia Tech  facilities, leveraging our existing knowledge base and technology stacks. Collaborations with government, industry, and university partners will be encouraged throughout our development processes, for accessing additional government-open-source toolsets and recommendations.
4 . Related Work
Related Projects	Descriptions
ACK: Adaptive Cross-Domain Kill-Webs
 
DARPA STO Contract: FA8750-19-C-0056 (Subcontractor to RTX); Phase 1-3, $1,500,000, PoP: 3/2019-3/2023; Greg Kuperman, (703) 526-6624, gregory.kuperman@darpa.mil;  Dan Javorsek, (661) 878-3616, daniel.javorsek@darpa.mil 	We achieved TRL9 through deployment of the ARAKNID (Anytime Reasoning and Analysis for Kill-Web Negotiation and Instantiation across Domains) system for the ACK program, supporting the multi-domain C2 vision of ABMS across domains of space, air, ground, maritime, and cyber. We designed a flexible HTN kill-web structure able to perform computation within seconds, while evaluating thousands of different potential CoAs, for automatically pairing the right sensor to the right effector at the right time. Operators-in-the-loop were provided with a varied assortment of ranked options for CoAs. In addition, we streamlined C2 execution by automating the transmission of key commands via machine-to-machine messaging. We also supported deployment to PlatformOne, receiving three Certificates to Field. Lastly, we performed 23 live multi-domain validation exercises with increasing levels of complexity, followed by deployment to NORAD/NORTHCOM operations serving missile defense missions for the US and Canada.
NGSX: Next Generation Space Exchange
 
Huntington Ingalls Industries Subcontract # P000047413; $559,875, PoP: 2/15/2024-3/15/2025; John Beighle, (937) 673-4747, john.beighle@spaceforce.mil 	Interactive Aptitude is the primary developer/maintainer of NGSX through AFRL/RVES. NGSX serves SSA (Space Situational Awareness) and RPO (Rendezvous and Proximity Operations) simulation needs of the USSF. NGSX maximizes government and industry collaboration by connecting multiple leading Modeling & Simulation environments for cohesive use within one Space Domain simulator. NGSX prioritizes simulation response times via horizontal computational scalability within a microservice architecture, across computation nodes on a PC’s CPU and/or GPU, at HPC centers, and on cloud services. NGSX provides live dynamic space cataloging using both space and ground sensors, along with more complex behaviors and use cases, including: providing a comprehensive platform for the development and testing of single and multi-spacecraft autonomy in virtual, constructive, and live scenarios; adversary modeling with wargaming research and development; force structure identification; BMC3 integrations; as well as training of spacecraft operators. Additionally, NGSX enhances user interaction through user interfaces leveraging Unreal Engine, enabling real-time simulation control, playback viewing, and metric analysis, catered to the needs of multiple end-users.
SIERO (Synchronized Intelligence for Electro-magnetic-spectrum-operations Rapid Orchestration)
 
Huntington Ingalls Industries  Subcontract # P000047413; $999,999.81, PoP: 11/16/2023-3/15/2025; Tracey Bowen, (505) 400-7917, tracey.bowen@spaceforce.mil	SIERO is an validated EMSO (electromagnetic spectrum operations) simulator supporting autonomy/wargaming scenarios. SIERO integrates diverse EMSO data sources and simulates dynamic adversaries, allowing for adaptive responses in air and space platforms for many vs. many wargaming scenarios, including the development/consideration of onboard Cognitive EW (Electronic Warfare) AI mode switching. SIERO technologies also include trustworthy uncertainty-tracing methods, allowing for detailed assessments of simulation results/parameters compared to live/test data, quantifying simulation uncertainties for: sensor components, communications mechanisms, and electronic warfare for combined effects among many aircraft/spacecraft. By utilizing verifiable models of EMSO sensing, electronic attacks, and electronic protection, SIERO enables trustworthy wargaming simulations allowing for fast and accurate insights on EW components and autonomy strategies. As SIERO is integrated with a C2 system, this approach also enables commanders to trust M&S C2 decisions, significantly improving operational decision-making and response capabilities for DoD EMSO operations.
Spacecraft Autonomy Design and Implementation for Missions: CICERO (Community Initiative for Cellular Earth Remote Observation), EMM (Emirate Mars Mission), and Pending MAX (Multi-Asteroid Explorer) Mission[23,24]
 
2012-Current: Developed via $1.5m+ of funding from GeoOptics and LASP, Daniel Baker, (303) 492-6412	Our team has lead the design and implementation of multiple spacecraft TRL9 autonomy designs and implementations, leveraging hardware-in-the-loop capabilities of our open-source Basilisk simulator and Vizard visualization tool. For the CICERO (Community Initiative for Cellular Earth Remote Observation) spacecraft, we have led the design and implementation of the ADCS (Attitude Determination and Control System), resulting in a high-performance small-sat 3-axis attitude control system. We have also led the design/implementation of the ADCS on the EMM (Emirate Mars Mission) spacecraft, as well as the ongoing Multi-Asteroid Explorer (MAX) mission. We simulated realistic operational conditions, ensuring that each spacecraft can maintain precise orientation and maneuvering capabilities in various space environments. Additionally, our involvement in the MAX mission includes the development of innovative navigation algorithms that enable the spacecraft to autonomously navigate between and around multiple asteroids, enhancing its scientific return and mission flexibility.
Basilisk and Vizard: Astrodynamics Simulation and Visualization Frameworks[29]

 

2018-Current: Developed via $5m+ of funding from DARPA, NRO, Air Force, Industry Customers, and many others	Our team has developed and maintains the open-source Basilisk astrodynamics simulation software ( https://hanspeterschaub.info/basilisk/index.html ), which is now being used by dozens of industry, academic, and government research labs. Basilisk is capable of both faster-than-realtime spacecraft simulations, as well as providing real-time options for hardware-in-the-loop simulations. In addition, the Vizard visualization tool has been developed that seamlessly integrates with Basilisk for 3D rendering of simulation results, providing an interactive display to verify simulation results. The resulting framework is targeted for astrodynamics research, spacecraft autonomy development, human-in-the-loop training for satellite control, Digital-Twin modeling of spacecraft, as well as sophisticated mission-specific vehicle simulations including hardware-in-the-loop scenarios. 
Collaborative Mission Autonomy with Shielded Deep Reinforcement Learning (CMA-SHIELD)
 
AFRL: P1 Contract: FA864921P0137, $100,000, PoP: 2/2/2021-8/2/2022; P2 Contract FA864922P0833, $750,000, PoP: 3/11/2022-6/11/2023; Sean Phillips, (505) 846-0011, sean.phillips.9@spaceforce.mil	We implemented TRL2 multi-satellite decentralized onboard C2, using novel Deep Reinforcement Learning policies. Hundreds of dynamic prioritized ground imaging requests were received to the constellation from dispersed tactical requestors, considering complex spacecraft constraints including momentum wheel desaturation and battery discharge limitations. The DRL policy demonstrated value against a rule-based approach for: request fulfillment performance, long-time-horizon spacecraft safety planning through training with an emulation of the spacecraft’s implicit RTA system, and re-training generalizability as platforms are added/upgraded. CMA-SHIELD pioneered and validated “Shielded Deep Reinforcement Learning” (SDRL) policies that are able to outperform rule-based policies, especially for spacecraft safety metrics.
RAISR: Decentralized Autonomy for Space-Based Wargaming 
 
FA864923P1166, $1,250,000, PoP: 7/14/23-4/21/25; John Beighle, (937) 673-4747, john.beighle@spaceforce.mil 	We performed evaluations in support of the AFSIM simulator as being part of the possible next-generation Space Domain Awareness simulation infrastructure in USSF’s software/hardware deployment pipeline. We completed TRL2 demonstrations in AFSIM for space-to-space sensing and engagements within wargaming scenarios including the protection of a High Value Asset spacecraft from adversary spacecraft. High-fidelity sensors were used on satellites for sensing of other friendly/enemy satellites, including long range radar, short range precision radar, and sun-illuminated EO sensing. Engagement methods consisted of missile payloads being launched between friendly and enemy spacecraft. Results showed adequate flexibility of AFSIM for continued consideration within USSF’s simulation infrastructure, pending verification of AFSIM modeling accuracy for spacecraft dynamics, sensing, and engagements.
MINC (Mission-Integrated Network Control)
 
DARPA STO Contract: PO-0030442 (Subcontractor to Perspecta Labs), $600,000, PoP: 1/3/2022-8/3/2023; Mary Schurgot, (703) 526-6624, mary.schurgot@darpa.mil	We ensured that critical data finds a path to the right user at the right time in highly contested, highly dynamic communication environments. Our AI approach interoperates with a heterogeneous mix of legacy/future systems to ensure timely and reliable delivery of data. The growing emphasis on all-domain warfare compounds the complexity of controlling heterogeneous networks, where mosaic warfare concepts are developed through HTN Combinatorial Optimization techniques, to maximize optionality, diversity, and rapid adaptability for the orchestration of networks.
IA Data Management Suite: Interoperable Ecosystem of Data Processing, Exploitation, and Fusion Technologies
 
DARPA SAIL-ON, Contract #: HR001120C0055; $6,899,968; 11/21/2019-5/20/2023; Ted Senator, 703-526-6630
DARPA PerSEAS, Contract HR001110C0112; $8.92M; 2011-2014; Dr. Mita Desai, 703-526-4165
DARPA SquadX Core Technologies (SXCT), Contract DARPA-BAA-15-26; $6,866,127, 2015-2018; Kenneth Eason, 802-951-6315
DARPA XAI (Explainable AI), Contract N66001-17-2-4028; $1.5M; 2017-2021; Dr. Matt Turek, 703-526-6630; 
DARPA LwLL, subcontract to UC Berkeley; Contract FA8750‐19‐1‐0504; $1.864,055; 09/23/2019- 09/23/2020; Lauren Mitchell, 510.642.3417	We have developed our interoperable ecosystem of data management technologies with funding received through DARPA SAIL-ON, DARPA PerSEAS, DARPA SquadX, DARPA XAI, and DARPA LwLL. Our complete data management suite includes data processing, exploitation, and fusion:
●	Data processing components allow for handling big-data from fast streaming sources and filtering for data credibility/reliability
●	Exploitation components allow for performing efficient object detection, scene decomposition, and tracking with minimal training data
●	Fusion components allow for modeling single/mixes of behaviors, classifying complex interactions, complex activity recognition, normalcy modeling, and anomaly detection, considering sparse multi-modal (EO/IR/RF/HUMINT/etc.) data, able to handle high levels of uncertainties
The IA Data Management Suite can handle low-SWaP onboard computation, and is adaptable for ISR/F2T2EA scenarios in highly dynamic environments.
5 . Relationship with Future Research or Research and Development
The anticipated results of the POLARIS project, if successful, includes the creation of a comprehensive and validated simulation environment that seamlessly integrates high-fidelity simulations with diverse real-world data sources. This environment will enable robust evaluation of Space Domain Awareness (SDA) algorithms. Additionally, POLARIS aims to significantly reduce the costs and risks associated with algorithm validation by leveraging software-in-the-loop (SITL) simulations and hardware-in-the-loop (HITL) testbeds. The project will establish a standardized method for testing and evaluating SDA algorithms, ensuring their smooth transition from research to operational deployment within the USSF. Moreover, POLARIS will meet all USSF transition requirements, providing a streamlined pathway for algorithm deployment and developing user-friendly interfaces for real-time interaction and usability.
The Phase I effort is significant as it lays the groundwork for Phase II development by validating the feasibility of the POLARIS framework. This phase focuses on addressing high-technical-risk components by expanding the NGSX and SIERO simulators to combine real-world data with high-fidelity simulations. Phase I includes integrating specific SDA algorithms from CU Boulder's AVS Lab and Virginia Tech’s National Security Institute, providing a proof-of-concept that demonstrates the system's capability to support diverse algorithms and data sources. Additionally, it ensures compliance with USSF transition processes and requirements, facilitating smooth algorithm deployment. The development and testing of user interfaces during Phase I allow for early feedback, ensuring the final system is user-friendly and meets stakeholder needs. This phase also fosters collaboration among researchers, enabling them to contribute and compare algorithms within a unified platform, advancing SDA capabilities.
Phase II testing may possibly require security clearances, and we have outlined our approach for executing classified work per section “9: Facilities/Equipment.” Phase II tests may also require our software to obtain an Authority to Operate (ATO) for DoD cybersecurity standards - a process we are familiar with and will consider during Phase I development. Phase II testing will most likely not require any additional clearances, certifications, and approvals. However as more is understood of the customer requirements, these long lead-time items will be considered thoroughly.
6 . Commercialization Strategy
Interactive Aptitude LLC is strategically positioned to commercialize the POLARIS technology, a cutting-edge solution designed to revolutionize decentralized collaborative autonomy with a focus on software, hardware integrations, and human-on-the-loop technologies. Our commercialization strategy encompasses a multifaceted approach tailored to penetrate and expand within the DoD, other Federal Agencies, and the private sector markets. Our strategy is built on leveraging proprietary technology, securing early adopters, scaling operations, and ensuring continuous innovation to meet the dynamic needs of our target markets.
Near-Term Basic Research Algorithm Transition to USSF Unclassified Operations: To rapidly transition basic SDA algorithms into operational use by the USSF, we propose a phased approach focused on maturing promising algorithms using unclassified commercial data in close partnership with the SDA TAP Lab and AFRL/RV Dragon Army unclassified operations. In Phase 1, we will establish a pipeline to ingest two academic algorithms, integrate them with unclassified datasets and test scenarios from the TAP Lab, and demonstrate initial performance gains in an unclassified environment. Tight feedback loops with operators at the TAP Lab and Dragon Army will ensure operational relevance. In Phase 2, we will scale up the pipeline, further optimize algorithm performance, and deliver a robust software capability suitable for transition to live operations at the JCO and other Space Force elements. By focusing first on unclassified development in partnership with these key transition partners, we can dramatically accelerate the deployment of new SDA capabilities compared to a classified development approach, while still allowing for subsequent porting of proven algorithms to the classified domain as needed. This unclassified-first approach leverages the agility of commercial tools and data to deliver rapid improvements to the USSF.
Past Related Commercialization Successes: The Interactive Aptitude LLC team has a proven record of successful commercialization, with sales of $1.5m+ in the past five years for products leveraging AI techniques in the fields of business automation, unmanned system autonomy, education, resource management, and gaming. Specific to the field of command and control (C2), total sales amount to $890k+ in the past three years for our AI C2 products (“ADP&E” decentralized C2 autonomy planner, and “Live Policy Advisor” policy monitoring and updating). These AI C2 products have been sold/integrated into customer business products, namely three C2 platforms and two UxV platforms for Raytheon Technologies and SSCI. Additionally, our ability to commercialize our existing AI C2 products is accelerating, with $390k+ in sales just in the past 12 months for this product line alone.
First Product and Market Need: The first embodiment of POLARIS technology into a commercialized product will be updates to our existing AI C2 products (“ADP&E” and “Live Policy Advisor”), to expand their capabilities to more customers requiring advanced autonomous systems and human-machine collaboration. We aim to expand the use of our AI C2 products past defense operations, to also include services for emergency response, infrastructure inspection, and environmental monitoring. The global unmanned systems market is expected to reach approximately $56.5 billion by 2030, growing at a CAGR of around 20.3%,  while the small satellite market is expected to reach approximately $8.35 billion by 2026 with a CAGR around 18.8%.  The Digital Twin market is also projected to grow rapidly, with an estimated value of $11.12 billion in 2024 and a CAGR of ~37.5% through 2030.  This presents a substantial market, with a strong opportunity to further introduce and expand our AI C2 product line.
Funding Strategy: To rapidly commercialize POLARIS-derived technology, we anticipate raising $3-5 million through a combination of venture capital, angel investments, government grants, and strategic partnerships. This investment will facilitate R&D, marketing, outreach activities, and achievement of TRL9, ensuring the successful market introduction and scaling of our technology.
Marketing Expertise: We have proven our abilities to perform marketing via marketing campaigns, participation in industry events, and strategic alliances to enhance visibility and adoption, evidenced by the acceleration of revenue derived from our AI C2 product line. 
Competitive Landscape: We face competition from other firms in the autonomous systems and HMI markets. However, our unique value proposition lies in the comprehensive integration of software, hardware, and human-on-the-loop technologies, offering significantly superior decision-making, efficiency, and safety benefits. Our strategy focuses on delivering both price and quality advantages to distinguish us from competitors. We also actively work to submit patents to protect our proprietary advantages, and we are currently leveraging existing provisional patents to protect our AI C2 product line.
Commercialization Timeline and Milestones:
●	By Q4 2025, One Year after Start of Phase II, Product Development and Testing: Focusing on integrating the POLARIS-derived technology with 2+ existing platforms and ensuring scalability and performance under diverse conditions.
●	By Q1 2026, At the End of Phase II, Initial Product Launch: Leveraging strategic partnerships and existing relationships with industry and government organizations to secure 2+ early adopters. Also ensure compliance with all necessary standards for deployment in targeted sectors.
●	By Q3 2026, Six Months after the End of Phase II, Market Expansion: Acquire $3-5 million in Venture Capital to fund marketing, outreach activities, and achievement of TRL9. Achieve a market share of 0.5%-1%.
●	By Q3 2027, 18 Months after the End of Phase II, Achieve Significant Market Share: Achieve significant market share via continuous R&D investment, refining of the technology, and expansion of the solution's application range, to secure a significant 7%-12% market share.
Expected Commercialization Outcomes: By implementing this comprehensive strategy, we anticipate to meet our aggressive milestones, including successful technology integration, market entry, and expansion, with substantial revenue growth and market share acquisition. Our commitment to innovation and customer satisfaction will establish our current AI C2 product line, combined with POLARIS-derived technologies, as market-leading products in decentralized collaborative autonomy solutions.
7 . Key Personnel  
Principal Investigator - Dr. James Vaccaro, PhD;  Experience:  A PhD AI scientist by training, Dr. Vaccaro has 14 years of experience as an AFRL Program Manager specializing in C2 (command and control) development and acquisitions. Dr. Vaccaro separately has 22 years of experience as a Lead C2 Software Engineer, having developed multi-domain DoD C2 software that has been implemented into the DoD as programs of record, as well as C2 components that have been verified in 200+ live demonstrations. Dr. Vaccaro has also built commercial products leveraging AI techniques in the fields of education, resource management, and gaming, and has successfully scaled these products in commercial marketplaces. Most recently, Dr. Vaccaro has led teams for high-performance-computing Modeling & Simulation considering real/synthetic data generation for Space Superiority, on programs AFRL RAISR (Decentralized Autonomy for Space-Based Wargaming), SIERO (Synchronized Intelligence for Electro-magnetic-spectrum-operations Rapid Orchestration) and NGSX (Next Generation Space eXchange).  Additional information: https://www.linkedin.com/in/james-vaccaro-ai/. US Citizen. Prior Top Secret Clearance. Relevant publications:
●	J. Vaccaro, “Autonomous Dynamic Planning and Execution for Very Large Partially Observable and Stochastic Environments,” Computer Engineering Ph.D. Dissertation, June 2010.
●	J. Vaccaro, “Dynamic Planning in a Real-Time Multi-Player Strategy Game,” AFRL Visiting Professor Final Report, December 2011.
●	J. Vaccaro, P. Yaworsky.  “A Soft-Computing Method for Spatio-Temporal Data Representation and Processing.”  International Conference on Informatics and Controls (ICI&C), June 1997.
●	J. Vaccaro, C. Guest, P. Yaworsky, S. Alexander. “Comparison of Recurrent Neural Networks with Evolutionary Learning, Fuzzy-Logic, and Rule-Based Approaches in a Goal-Driven Application.” 3rd International Conference on Dynamic Neural Networks (DYNN), Bielefeld, Germany, November 2000.
●	J. Vaccaro, P. Yaworsky.  “Real-Time Modeling of Primitive Environments through Wavelet Sensors and Hebbian Learning.” SPIE's 13th Annual International Symposium on Aerospace/Defense Sensing, Simulation and Controls, Orlando, April 1999.
Program Manager and Data Fusion SME - Dr. Eran Swears, PhD;  Experience: Dr. Swears has over 20 years of experience working on DoD related AI/ML/Computer-Vision projects and more recently large scale commercial AI/ML/Computer-Vision products for Walmart stores. He was the Co-Lead of the AI/ML Group at Scientific Systems (SSCI) where he was the Principal Investigator (PI) on space and multi-domain autonomy/C2 programs. Prior to Joining SSCI he spent 13 years at Kitware Inc. where he served as PI, Technical Lead, Principal Researcher, Project Lead, and Key Developer on over 50 DoD projects. These projects include, but are not limited to: DARPA LwLL, DARPA SAIL-ON, DARPA XAI, DARPA Blackjack, DARPA PerSEAS, DARAP VIRAT, and IARPA DIVA, along with NGA projects such as SPOTTER. Dr. Swears’ technical contributions focused on pattern recognition, machine learning, graphical models, scene understanding, tracking, and activity recognition, anomaly and threat detection, along with multi-modal fusion. Dr. Swears also developed Deep Networks for object detection, scene segmentation, and threat detection (PerSEAS, Loft Demo), with a focus on domain adaptation (SAIL-ON), learning with few labels (LwLL), and explainability (XAI) in a variety of image and video applications. Many of these projects involved research, experiments, and integration of low-SWaP devices (PerSEAS, Blackjack, Loft Demo) for real-world applications. Additional information: www.linkedin.com/in/eran-swears. US Citizen. Prior Top Secret SCI Clearance. Relevant publications:
●	E. Swears, “Classifying and detecting activity based patterns using relational context and probabilistic models in video,” PhD thesis, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, NY, 2015
●	 E. Swears, A. Hoogs, Q. Ji, K. Boyer, “Complex Activity Recognition using Granger Constrained DBN (GCDBN) in Sports and Surveillance Video,” IEEE Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR), 2014
●	M. Brown, K. Fieldhouse, E. Swears, P. Tunison, A. Romlein, and A. Hoogs, Multi-Modal Detection Fusion on Mobile UGV for Squad-Level Threat Alerting, in Proceedings of the MSS National Symposium on Sensor and Data Fusion, 2018
Electromagnetic Spectrum Operations (EMSO) and Embedded Systems SME - Deborah Botkin, M.S.  Experience: Mrs. Botkin brings over 23 years of expertise in advanced applications and embedded software engineering, specializing in EMSO and embedded systems with a focus on processing of real-time RF signals, simulation of EMSO wargaming for air and space domains, and synthetic data generation. Throughout her career at Northrop Grumman Corporation and previous positions, Mrs. Botkin has spearheaded the development of critical software solutions, including 3D gaming applications for military training and comprehensive software lifecycle management for embedded EMSO systems from conception to delivery. Her technical prowess extends to leading-edge technologies in software development, ensuring her projects leverage the latest in Ada, C/C#/C++, Python, and Model-Based engineering languages, among others. As a senior engineering manager, she has also demonstrated exceptional leadership in guiding large technical teams, implementing Agile methodologies, and enhancing software quality assurance practices. Mrs. Botkin's work has significantly contributed to electromagnetic and embedded systems' advancements, particularly in the areas of real-time data processing, simulation, and synthetic data creation for improved AI solutions' robustness. Her efforts in real data curation have enabled the seamless integration of real-world data with simulated environments to train and evaluate decision-making AI algorithms effectively. Additional information: https://www.linkedin.com/in/deborah-botkin-761a95106/. US Citizen. Holds active Secret Clearance.  
DoD and Commercialization Transition SME - Victor Bajenaru, M.S.  Experience: Mr. Bajenaru has 14 years of experience developing software/hardware products in the fields of web development, research instrumentation, manufacturing, and multi-domain autonomy. He has technical expertise in defining necessary adaptations of software/hardware prototypes to meet the needs of DoD End-Users in the fields of unmanned system autonomy, command and control, electronic warfare, and data processing/fusion. He also has experience leading teams to commercialize software/hardware products from the idea stage, to the prototype stage, and into commercial sales, through past software/hardware startup experiences in the fields of business automation, financial services, and healthcare. He has also led teams in researching potential future C2 technologies, such as Deep Reinforcement Learning for C2 on AFRL CMA-SHIELD. Additional information: https://www.linkedin.com/in/vbajenaru/. US Citizen. Holds active Secret Clearance.  Relevant publications:
●	V. Bajenaru, A. Herrmann, H. Schaub, J. Ramirez, and S. Phillips. "Trustworthy Reinforcement Learning for Decentralized Control of Satellites," AAS Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference, Breckenridge, CO (Feb 5, 2023). 
●	B. Benyo, M. Atighetchi, R. Broderick-Sander, S. Jeter, J. Hiebel, V. Bajenaru. “Building Adaptive Cross-Domain Kill-Webs.” IEEE MILCOM 2022 Restricted Access Technical Program, Systems Perspectives Session (Nov 30, 2022).
●	V. Bajenaru, J. Vaccaro,  M. Colby, B. Benyo. “Comprehensive top-K recommender system for command and control, using novel evaluation and optimization algorithms,” SPIE Artificial Intelligence for Multi-Domain Operations (Jun 6, 2022).
University Partner Principal Investigator - Dr. Hanspeter Schaub, PhD Experience: Dr. Schaub is a professor of the Aerospace Engineering Sciences department at the University of Colorado at Boulder, holding the Glenn L. Murphy Chair, where he performs research on spacecraft dynamics and control research, relative motion sensing and control, charged spacecraft motion and touchless charge sensing, space debris mitigation, modern spacecraft simulation and mission analysis code development, and autonomous spacecraft command and control tasking using shielded neural Networks. Dr. Schaub’s extensive publication record includes over 207 peer reviewed journal articles which are published or pending, 327 conference papers, 4 patents issued and 1 patent pending, as well co-authoring of a successful textbook on analytical mechanics of space systems. Dr. Schaub is also the lead software developer for the widely-used open-source Basilisk Astrodynamics Simulation Framework. US Citizen. Linkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/hanspeterschaub/ Publications: https://hanspeterschaub.info/resume.pdf  
8 . Foreign Citizens: N/A
9 . Facilities/Equipment
Our offices, located in San Diego, CA, are equipped with advanced computing systems, including a private cloud for development, testing, and hosting of machine learning applications, optimized for AI workloads. The computing resources include high-end GPUs and significant storage and memory capabilities, which are more than adequate for machine learning model development. In addition, we have access to AWS Cloud resources for heavier computational requirements, such as large-scale training of models and high-volume data processing. Our team is experienced in AWS SageMaker, RedShift, and other AI and ML services, providing us with the capability to scale up operations if needed.
Interactive Aptitude LLC supports the ability to perform classified work at various levels, and with various information system requirements. We maintain a Facility Clearance with the DCSA, and we have multiple employees with at least active Secret Level clearances, and ability to upgrade their clearance levels. To augment our ability to perform classified work with more specific information systems (DSWAN, SECTRE, etc.), we also have active relationships with subcontractor Raytheon Technologies and their many nearby secure room options to support this effort. We have also leveraged “secure room cafe’s” at Air Force Bases (Robins AFB and Hanscom AFB) for particular information system accesses on past contracts. We also maintain a relationship with Westway Enterprises ( https://www.westwayllc.com/ ) who offers turn-key secure space services to handle additional specific information system requirements depending on any additional secure room features required in the future on this project.
10 . Subcontractors/Consultants
The University of Colorado Boulder’s Autonomous Vehicle Systems (AVS) Lab, led by Dr. Hanspeter Schaub, will be the main university subcontractor on this STTR project. This university team complements the POLARIS project well due to their extensive expertise in spacecraft dynamics, control, and simulation. The AVS Lab’s development of the high-fidelity Basilisk Astrodynamics Simulation Framework aligns perfectly with POLARIS's goal of integrating real-world data with high-fidelity simulations to test and evaluate SDA algorithms. Dr. Schaub's work on spacecraft autonomy, including optimized tasking, ensures the provision of advanced, reliable algorithms necessary for SDA operations. The AVS Lab's proven track record in successful space missions and its contributions to advanced simulation environments will enhance POLARIS's capabilities, ensuring robust, cost-effective algorithm testing and a transition path to USSF operations.
Interactive Aptitude LLC also has a history of collaborating on the government-open-source RESONAATE SDA tracking codebase maintained by Virginia Tech’s National Security Institute, more specifically the RESONAATE team led by Dr. Kevin Schroeder. Interactive Aptitude LLC personnel have used the RESONAATE codebase for over a year, and they are familiar with the codebase enough to integrate their SDA tracking algorithms (namely initial orbit determination, maneuver detection, and target re-acquisition algorithms), into the POLARIS system. During Phase I and follow-on efforts, we will continue to collaborate with the RESONAATE team to exchange notes on directions and techniques.
11 . Prior, Current, or Pending Support of Similar Proposals or Awards
No prior, current, or pending support for proposed work.



JAMES M. VACCARO, PH.D.
PHONE : +1-858-245-1741 • E-MAIL: JVACCARO@INTERACTIVEAPTITUDEAI.COM
EXPERIENCE

CEO/Founder, Interactive Aptitude, LLC 	San Diego, California 2012-present       
Ensured high quality execution of software and algorithm development contracts with four separate customer companies (Scientific Systems Company Inc., Color Butler Inc., Realstir Inc., and Veracity Security Systems), in the fields of military operations, business automation, real estate, and human motor function analysis. Contract work consisted of Artificial Intelligence research, rapid software prototype development, and smartphone/web app deployment. 
Staff Research Scientist, Lockheed Martin	San Diego, California 2001-2012
Primary focus was in three areas of research and development: urban search and rescue applications, multiplayer non-cooperative gaming applications, and designing an architecture for general autonomous dynamic planning and execution solutions for very large partially observable and stochastic environments. Also wrote whitepapers and proposals for government contracts.
Senior Electronics Engineer, Air Force Research Laboratory	Rome, New York 1987-2001
Developed technology that improves the modeling and simulation of the full spectrum of Data Scientist applications. Focus was on command and control, where research is focused on the development of goal-directed learning techniques for strategic and tactical planning. Developed a unique proof of concept demonstration that was being benchmarked through the development of an automated intelligent player for multiplayer games. Had three tours of duty as a Principal Investigator for AFOSR: (1) UC Berkeley, (2) Institut für Neuroinformatik, Bochum, Germany, (3) Centre d’Etudes et de Recherches, Toulouse, France where investigations in plausible neural systems were encoded and examined.
EDUCATION
Doctor Of Philosophy In Electrical And Computer Engineering 
06/2010		University Of California San Diego		Gpa: 3.87			La Jolla, California		

Master Of Science In Electrical And Computer Engineering 
12/1991		Syracuse University			Gpa: 3.65			Syracuse, New York	

Bachelor Of Science In Electrical And Computer Engineering 
05/1987		Clarkson University			Gpa: 3.35 		Potsdam, New York	
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS
1.	J. Vaccaro, “Autonomous Dynamic Planning and Execution for Very Large Partially Observable and Stochastic Environments,” Computer Engineering Ph.D. Dissertation, June 2010.
2.	J. Vaccaro, “Dynamic Planning in a Real-Time Multi-Player Strategy Game,” AFRL Visiting Professor Final Report, December 2011.
3.	J. Vaccaro, P. Yaworsky.  “A Soft-Computing Method for Spatio-Temporal Data Representation and Processing.”  International Conference on Informatics and Controls (ICI&C), June 1997.
4.	J. Vaccaro, C. Guest, P. Yaworsky, S. Alexander. “Comparison of Recurrent Neural Networks with Evolutionary Learning, Fuzzy-Logic, and Rule-Based Approaches in a Goal-Driven Application.” 3rd International Conference on Dynamic Neural Networks (DYNN), Bielefeld, Germany, November 2000.
5.	J. Vaccaro, P. Yaworsky.  “Real-Time Modeling of Primitive Environments through Wavelet Sensors and Hebbian Learning.” SPIE's 13th Annual International Symposium on Aerospace/Defense Sensing, Simulation and Controls, Orlando, April 1999.
6.	Victor Bajenaru, James Vaccaro, Mitchell Colby, Brett Benyo, "Comprehensive Top-K Recommender System for Command and Control, using Novel Evaluation and Optimization Algorithms", SPIE 2022 Defense and Commercial Sensing Conference, April 2022.
7.	J. Vaccaro, D. Gourion, M. Samuelides, S. Thorpe.  “Rank-Based Hebbian Learning in a Multi-Layered Neural Network.” International Conference on Neural Networks & Virtual Intelligence (DYNN & VI), Stockholm, Sweden, June 1998.
8.	J. Vaccaro, C. Guest, D. Ross. “Evolutionary Programming for Goal-Driven Dynamic Planning,” SPIE’s 16th Aerosense Symposium, Orlando, FL, April 2002.





Dr. Hanspeter Schaub
Glenn L. Murphy Chaired Professor of Engineering, Smead Aerospace Eng. Sciences Department Chair 
431 UCB, University of Colorado, Boulder 80309-0431 Phone: (303) 492-2767

Education
1998 Ph.D. Texas A&M University, 1994 M.S. Texas A&M University, 1992, B.S. Texas A&M University
Work Experience
Currently a full professor at the University of Colorado holding the Glenn L. Murphy chair, and the department chair starting in July 2022.  Dr. Schaub is advising 16 Ph.D students and 11 Master level graduate students in the areas of spacecraft autonomy, attitude dynamics and control research,  spacecraft proximity ﬂying, charged spacecraft motion, space debris mitigation, redundant attitude control using momentum exchange devices, touchless despinning of space objects, and visual servo control of unmanned vehicles.  Has graduated 73 master level and 24 doctoral students to date.  
Research Projects and Grants
Total research funds raised to date is about $7,188,000 as well as helped graduate students receive NSF (9), NASA(6) and NDSEG(9), Fulbright (2) and La Caixa graduate fellowships.  The grants received include funds from DARPA, NRO, Naval Surface Warfare Center, Air Force, and SBIR awards to study novel electrostatically actuated relative orbital motion of spacecraft, study space debris remediation concepts, investigate electrostatic force and torque models for space objects, as well as research autonomous attitude control solutions using redundant momentum exchange devices.  Several projects are focused on the space debris mitigation challenge including a touchless large GEO debris mitigation method. Acted as the ADCS lead for the CICERO spacecraft design, developing a high-performance small-sat 3-axis attitude control system.  He was the ADCS algorithm lean for the Emirate Mars Mission (EMM), collaborating with the Laboratory of Atmospheric and Space Physics (LASP).  Recent work is researching computational astrodynamics and flight software development, including using machine learning to yield robust higher level command and control autonomy.
Selected Honors and Awards
2019	AIAA Fellow
2018 	AIAA Mechanics and Control Flight Award
2017 	ASEE John Leland Atwood Award
2017	Glenn L. Murphy Chair of Engineering
2016	Outstanding Young Alumni award from TAMU aero department
2014	AAS Fellow
2013	AIAA Summerfield Book Award
2012	Dean’s Award for outstanding teaching
2011	Outstanding Faculty Advisor Award, University of Colorado
2010	Provost's Faculty Achievement Award, University of Colorado
Professional Service
Currently Editor-in-Chief of the AIAA Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, a guest editor for Journal of Astronautical Sciences and Acta Astronautica, a former associate editor for IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, and a former associate editor of the AIAA JGCD.
Publications
The extensive publication record includes over 206 peer reviewed journal articles which are published or pending, 327 conference papers, 5 patents issued, as well co-authored a successful text book on analytical mechanics of space systems.  A revised 4th  edition of this text book appeared in 2018, and the 2nd edition won the Summerfield Book award in 2013. 

