Version 
4 
DAF 
- 6 
condition in writing. Applicants seeking this approval must make such a request with their initial proposal 
submission. The DAF will not consider these requests prior to proposal submission. 
DAF USE OF SUPPORT CONTRACTORS
Restrictive notices notwithstanding, proposals may be handled for administrative purposes only, by 
support contractors. These support contractors may include, but are not limited to TEC Solutions, Inc., 
APEX, Oasis Systems, Riverside Research, Peerless Technologies, HPC
-COM, Mile Two, Montech, 
Wright Brothers Institute, and MacB (an Alion Company). In addition, only Government employees and 
technical personnel from Federally Funded Research and Development Centers (FFRDCs) MITRE and 
Aerospace Corporations w
orking under contract to provide technical support to AF Life Cycle 
Management Center and Space and Missiles Centers may evaluate proposals. All support contractors are 
bound by appropriate non-
disclosure agreements. Contact the D
AF SBIR/STTR CO Daniel J. Brewer 
(Daniel.Brewer.13@us.af.mil
)  with concerns regarding the use of support contractors.
PROPOSAL STATUS AND FEEDBACK
The Principal Investigator (PI) and Corporate Official (CO) indicated on the Proposal Cover Sheet will be 
notified by e
-mail regarding proposal selection or non
-selection. Small Businesses will receive a 
notification for each proposal submitted. Please read each notification carefully and note the Proposal 
Number and Topic Number referenced.  
Automated feedback will be provided for Phase I proposals designated Not Selected. Additional feedback 
may be provided at the sole discretion of the DAF.  
IMPORTANT: 
Proposals submitted to the DAF are received and evaluated by different organizations, 
handled by topic. Each organization operates within its own schedule for proposal evaluation and 
selection. Updates and notification timeframes will vary. If contacted regarding a proposal submission, it 
is not necessary to request information regarding additional submissions. Separate notifications are 
provided for each proposal.  
The Air Force anticipates that all proposals will be evaluated and selections finalized within 
approximately 90 calendar days of solicitation close. Refrain from contacting the BAA CO for proposal 
status before that time.  
Refer to the DoD STTR 25.D
 BAA for procedures to protest the Announcement.  
As further prescribed in FAR 33.106(b), FAR 52.233
-3, Protests after Award should be submitted to: Air 
Force SBIR/STTR Contracting Officer Daniel J. Brewer, Daniel.Brewer.13@us.af.mil.  
AIR FORCE SUBMISSION OF FINAL REPORTS  
All Final Reports will be submitted to the awarding DAF organization in accordance with Contract 
instructions. Companies will not submit Final Reports directly to the Defense Technical Information 
Center (DTIC).
PHASE II PROPOSAL SUBMISSIONS  
DAF organizations may request Phase II proposals while Phase I technical performance is ongoing or at 
any time after the conclusion of the period of performance. This decision will be based on the awardee’s 
technical progress, as determined by an DAF Technical Point of Contact review using the Phase II review 
criteria outlined above. 
Phase II is the demonstration of the technology found feasible in Phase I. Only Phase I awardees are 
eligible to submit a Phase II proposal. All Phase I awardees will be sent a notification with the Phase II 
proposal submittal date and detailed Phase II pr
oposal preparation instructions. If the physical or email 
Version 
4 
DAF 
- 7 
addresses or firm points of contact have changed since submission of the Phase I proposal, correct 
information shall be sent to the AF SBIR/STTR One Help Desk. Phase II dollar values, performance 
periods, and proposal content will be specified in the Phase
 II request for proposal.
NOTE: The DAF primarily makes STTR Phase I and II awards as Firm
-Fixed
-Price contracts. However, 
awardees are strongly urged to work toward a Defense Contract Audit Agency (DCAA)
-approved 
accounting system. If the company intends to continue work with the DoD, an approved accounting 
system will allow for competition in a broader array of acquisition opportunities, including award of 
Cost
-Reimbursement types of contracts. Please address questions to the Phase II CO, if selected for 
award. 
All proposals must be submitted electronically via DSIP 
by the date indicated in the Phase II proposal 
instructions. Note: Only ONE Phase II proposal may be submitted for each Phase I award. 
AIR FORCE SBIR/STTR PROGRAM MANAGEMENT IMPROVEMENTS 
The DAF reserves the right to modify the Phase II submission requirements. Should the requirements 
change, all Phase I awardees will be notified. The DAF also reserves the right to change any 
administrative procedures that will improve management of the DAF SBIR/STTR Program at any time.  
TOPIC
-SPECIFIC INFORMATION 
Awards made under this topic will have a maximum value of $250,000.00. Proposals that exceed this 
maximum value will not be considered for evaluations or award. Awards made under this topic will have 
a maximum period of performance of six (6) months. Proposals that exceed this duration will not be 
considered for evaluations or award. Technical volumes submitted under this topic have a page/slide limit 
of 
10 
pages. Pages/slides in excess of this amount will not be considered by the DAF during evaluations. 